FOR MANY YEARS THE RICH
COUNTRIES OF THE WORLD
HAVE TAKEN THE FOOD ON
THEIR PLATES FOR GRANTED.
A TRIP TO THE SUPERMARKET
AND IT'S ALL THERE:
FOOD FROM EVERY
CORNER OF THE WORLD.
BUT NOW THERE ARE WARNING SIGNS
THAT IT IS ALL ABOUT TO CHANGE.
I VIEW THE CHALLENGE ON
THE FOOD FRONT AS PERHAPS
THE LEADING CHALLENGE
FACING HUMANITY TODAY.
>>IN THE LAST TWO YEARS THERE
HAVE BEEN DRAMATIC SPIKES IN
FOOD PRICES - EVEN SPARKING
RIOTS ON THREE CONTINENTS.
THE FUTURE WARS MIGHT BE
FOUGHT AROUND FOOD AND WATER
AS OPPOSED TO, SAY,
OIL AND TERRITORY.
>>DIMINISHING NATURAL
RESOURCES AND RISING DEMAND
FROM AN EXPLODING
WORLD POPULATION
MEANS FOOD COULD BE IN
INCREASINGLY SHORT SUPPLY.
THERE'S EVERY REASON TO
BE QUITE WORRIED ABOUT
FOOD SECURITY
FOR THE WORLD.
>>IN TODAY'S GLOBAL ECONOMY
CONSUMERS IN RICH COUNTRIES
HAVE GROWN USED TO A
LIMITLESS CHOICE OF FOOD
FROM ACROSS
THE WORLD.
LOCAL MARKETS HAVE BEEN
REPLACED BY GLOBAL ONES,
AND FOOD HAS
BECOME A COMMODITY.
RIDLEY ROAD MARKET IN LONDON,
ENGLAND IS A PERFECT EXAMPLE
OF OUR GLOBAL
FOOD CHAIN.
THERE'S A HUGE RANGE HERE -
EVERYTHING UNDER THE SUN.
AND NOT JUST THE BRITISH SUN
- THE MEDITERRANEAN SUN,
THE AFRICAN SUN, THE
SOUTH AMERICAN SUN -
PRODUCE FROM
ACROSS THE WORLD
IS BEING SOLD ON THIS
LOCAL ENGLISH MARKET.
MIRRORING SHOPS AND
SUPERMARKETS ACROSS THE GLOBE,
THIS SCENE OF PLENTY,
ACCORDING TO EXPERTS
LIKE TIM LANG,
CANNOT LAST.
THE NIGHTMARE SCENARIO
IS THAT THERE WILL BE
FOOD WARS, THERE WILL BE
SCARCITY WARS, THERE'LL BE
RESOURCE WARS, FIGHTING FOR
MINERALS, FOR THE FERTILIZERS,
THERE'S OIL RUNNING OUT,
THERE'S CLIMATE CHANGE COMING.
I THINK THE
PARTY'S OVER.
THE CAPACITY OF THE WORLD TO
PRODUCE AS MUCH ABUNDANTLY
AS IT HAS DONE IS
BEGINNING TO BE SQUEEZED.
UNLESS WE CHANGE HOW WE
GROW FOOD, HOW WE EAT IT,
WHAT WE EAT, HOW MUCH
WE'RE PREPARED TO PAY FOR IT,
WE'RE WALKING
INTO CRISIS.
I VIEW THE CHALLENGE ON
THE FOOD FRONT AS PERHAPS
THE LEADING CHALLENGE
FACING HUMANITY TODAY.
>>LESTER BROWN IS THE FOUNDER
AND PRESIDENT OF THE INFLUENTIAL
CAMPAIGN GROUP, THE EARTH POLICY
INSTITUTE, AND HAS BEEN AN
ENVIRONMENTAL AND AGRICULTURAL
ANALYST FOR 50 YEARS.
DURING THE LAST HALF
OF THE LAST CENTURY
THE NUMBER OF HUNGRY
PEOPLE IN THE WORLD
WAS DECLINING, AND THEN
WHAT HAPPENED WAS THAT
AFTER 2000 THE NUMBER OF
HUNGRY PEOPLE IN THE WORLD
STOPPED DECLINING
AND BEGAN INCREASING
AND IN THE LAST TWO YEARS IT'S
GONE UP FAIRLY SUBSTANTIALLY.
>>THE PREDICTIONS ARE
THAT A LOOMING FOOD CRISIS
WILL AFFECT RICH AND
POOR COUNTRIES ALIKE.
I THINK FOOD SECURITY, EVEN FOR
THOSE OF US LIVING IN AFFLUENT
COUNTRIES, IS GOING TO BECOME
AN ISSUE BECAUSE IT'S GOING TO
TAKE MORE AND MORE OF OUR
INCOME TO FEED OURSELVES.
IN THE U.S. WE'VE
BECOME ACCUSTOMED
TO RATHER CHEAP
FOOD OVER THE YEARS
AND THAT'S
BEGINNING TO CHANGE.
WE'RE IN TROUBLE AND I
THINK MORE AND MORE PEOPLE
SENSE THAT NOW.
>>BUT WHAT'S CHANGED?
WHY ARE WE FACING
THIS LOOMING CRISIS?
THE WORLD'S POPULATION HAS
DOUBLED OVER THE LAST 40 YEARS
TO ALMOST
SEVEN BILLION.
AND JUST AT THE TIME WHEN THE
POPULATION IS SET TO SWELL BY
A FURTHER TWO BILLION, QUESTIONS
HAVE BEEN RAISED ABOUT THE
ABILITY OF MODERN AGRICULTURE
TO KEEP UP WITH DEMAND.
IT IS ESTIMATED THAT IF WE CARRY
ON FARMING USING TODAY'S
TECHNIQUES AND WITH YIELDS AT
TODAY'S LEVELS, THEN BY 2050
WE WILL NEED TO DOUBLE THE
AMOUNT OF FOOD WE GROW.
THIS INCREASE WOULD REQUIRE NEW
FARMING LAND THE SIZE OF BRAZIL
TO PRODUCE ENOUGH
FOOD TO FEED THE WORLD.
THE EXPECTATION IS THAT CROP
PRICES COULD BE, ON AVERAGE,
SOME 40% HIGHER THAN THE
LONG TERM TRENDS TO DATE.
>>RICHARD WARBURTON HAS
TO CONSIDER PREDICTIONS
OF FUTURE FOOD PRICES
AS THE HEAD OF THE UK'S
LARGEST AGRIBUSINESS
CONSULTANCY.
THERE'S A FINITE AMOUNT OF LAND,
AND THAT FINITE AMOUNT OF USABLE
ARABLE LAND WILL NOT SUPPORT
A DOUBLING IN FOOD PRODUCTION
DUE IN 2050.
I THINK POLICY MAKERS,
GOVERNMENT, ARE STARTING TO
REALIZE THERE'S A CORRELATION
BETWEEN FOOD SECURITY
AND POLITICAL
ECONOMIC STABILITY.
I DON'T THINK IT'S TOO
FAR-FETCHED TO THINK THAT
FUTURE WARS MIGHT BE FOUGHT
AROUND FOOD AND WATER
AS OPPOSED TO, SAY,
OIL AND TERRITORY.
>>THIS ISN'T SOME
NIGHTMARE FUTURE SCENARIO.
MANY EXPERTS SAY THAT WE HAVE
ALREADY SEEN THE EARLY TREMORS
OF THE CRISIS TO COME.
POOR GLOBAL HARVEST IN
2007 PUSHED AN EXTRA
40 MILLION PEOPLE
INTO HUNGER.
IN 2008 PEOPLE IN POORER
COUNTRIES ACROSS THE WORLD
TOOK TO THE STREETS.
THEY HAD A
COMMON CAUSE.
FOOD PRICES WERE RISING SO
FAST THAT MILLIONS OF PEOPLE
COULD NO LONGER AFFORD
THE FOOD IN THEIR SHOPS.
THIS HAS BEEN SEEN BY
MANY AS A WARNING
THAT FOOD SHORTAGES
IN YEARS TO COME
WILL CAUSE MORE POLITICAL
AND ECONOMIC INSECURITY.
SO WHAT ARE THE KEY FACTORS
PUSHING UP FOOD PRICES NOW
AND IN THE FUTURE?
MANY BELIEVE THAT ONE
OF THE BIGGEST FACTORS
IS CLIMATE CHANGE.
DR. RAJENDRA PACHAURI ACCEPTED
THE NOBEL PEACE PRIZE
ON BEHALF OF
HIS ORGANIZATION,
THE INTERGOVERNMENTAL PANEL
ON CLIMATE CHANGE, IN 2007.
THERE'S A WHOLE RANGE OF
IMPACTS THAT ARE ASSOCIATED
WITH CLIMATE CHANGE AND
THESE WILL HAVE DIFFERENT
IMPACTS ON DIFFERENT
PARTS OF THE WORLD.
IN THE CASE OF, SAY, THE UNITED
KINGDOM, EXTREME EVENTS
INCLUDING DROUGHTS, FLOODS,
HUGE QUANTITIES OF RAINFALL
IN A SHORT PERIOD OF TIME,
ARE CERTAINLY GOING TO
HAVE A MAJOR IMPACT ON
THE PRODUCTION OF FOOD.
IN THE CASE OF INDIA
WE'VE ESTIMATED THAT
EVERY ONE DEGREE INCREASE IN
TEMPERATURE COULD LEAD TO
5% TO 10%
REDUCTION IN YIELDS.
AS EARLY AS 2020 SEVEN
COUNTRIES IN AFRICA ARE LIKELY
TO SUFFER A DECLINE IN YIELDS
OF SOME CROPS BY UP TO 50%.
>>THE EFFECTS OF CLIMATE
CHANGE ON OUR FOOD SUPPLIES
ARE PREDICTED TO BE FELT SOON
AND COULD BE FAR-REACHING.
WORLDWIDE WE'RE NOT
GOING TO HAVE ENOUGH FOOD
TO FEED ALL THE PEOPLE.
THE FIRST THING THAT'LL HAPPEN
IS THAT PRICES WILL INCREASE.
THERE WILL BE PERIODS WHEN
PERHAPS WHAT THEY WANT TO EAT
MAY NOT EVEN
BE AVAILABLE.
SO THERE'S EVERY REASON
TO BE QUITE WORRIED
ABOUT FOOD SECURITY
FOR THE WORLD.
>>CLIMATE CHANGE FORECASTS
CAN SEEM LIKE DISCONNECTED
PREDICTIONS OF DOOM
FOR A FARAWAY TIME.
BUT FOR SOME, CLIMATE
CHANGE IS ALREADY A REALITY,
A STRUGGLE TO GET FROM
ONE DAY TO THE NEXT.
DROUGHTS IN PARTS
OF KENYA HAVE BECOME
FOUR TIMES MORE COMMON
IN THE LAST 25 YEARS.
THE COUNTRY HAS JUST SUFFERED
ITS THIRD FAILED HARVEST
IN A ROW AND THE WORST
DROUGHT IN MORE THAN A DECADE.
SOME OF THE WORST HIT HAVE BEEN
THE MAASAI PEOPLE WHO HAVE
HERDED LIVESTOCK IN THIS PART
OF THE WORLD FOR CENTURIES.
CHIEF SAMMY TARAKUAIE IS A
LEADER OF A MAASAI COMMUNITY
OF ABOUT 9,000 PEOPLE
WHO LIVE SOME 75 MILES
OUTSIDE NAIROBI
IN THE RIFT VALLEY.
HE HAS SEEN THE CHANGE IN
THE LOCAL WEATHER PATTERNS
IN HIS LIFETIME.
>>BEFORE THE WEATHER BECAME
SO UNPREDICTABLE THIS WOULD
HAVE BEEN THE BEST TIME OF
YEAR FOR A MAASAI HERDSMAN.
>>THE CHIEF HAS HAD A
DRAMATIC LOSS OF CATTLE
IN THE LAST NINE
OR TEN YEARS.
>>THE REMAINS OF THE
HUNDREDS OF ANIMALS
CHIEF SAMMY HAS
LOST TO DROUGHT
OVER THE LAST FEW
YEARS ARE NEARBY.
A CONSTANT REMINDER
OF WHAT HE HAS LOST.
THIS CALF DIED IN APRIL.
THIS WAS A
MILKING CALF
AND THE MOTHER
WAS A MILKING COW.
AND IT DIED
WITH A SMALL CALF.
CAN YOU SEE A
SMALL CALF HERE?
THIS ONE, THIS WAS
A COW AND A CALF.
WHEN YOU SEE A COW DYING
YOU FEEL LIKE DYING TOO.
BECAUSE IT IS A
PART OF YOUR LIFE.
THE MAASAI SAY COWS
ARE A PART OF YOUR LIFE.
>>THIS IS A TRAGEDY FOR
ONE MAN AND HIS PEOPLE.
AND THE EXPERTS WHO SAY
CLIMATE CHANGE IS A KEY FACTOR
BEHIND THE PROBLEMS IN KENYA
BELIEVE IT COULD ALSO HIT
FOOD PRODUCTION IN
MORE DEVELOPED COUNTRIES.
WARM, DROUGHT-PRONE AREAS
OF AUSTRALIA, ARGENTINA,
AND THE UNITED
STATES ARE AT RISK.
AND THEY ARE ALL COUNTRIES
THAT EXPORT LARGE QUANTITIES
OF FOOD ACROSS
THE GLOBE.
HALF THE WORLD'S
POPULATION COULD FACE A
CLIMATE-INDUCED FOOD CRISIS
BY THE END OF THE CENTURY.
IN MORE TEMPERATE CLIMATES THE
CONSEQUENCES OF CLIMATE CHANGE
ARE UNLIKELY TO
BE SO EXTREME.
BUT SOME FARMERS SAY THE
EFFECTS ON AGRICULTURE
ARE ALREADY
CLEAR TO SEE.
THE LECKFORD ESTATE IN
ENGLAND IS A FARM OF ABOUT
4,000 ACRES THAT IS
OWNED AND RUN BY THE
BRITISH SUPERMARKET
CHAIN, WAITROSE.
MORE THAN A THOUSAND
FRIESIAN CATTLE PRODUCE
MORE THAN FIVE MILLION LITERS
OF MILK A YEAR, AND APPLES,
PEARS, MUSHROOMS, AND
CEREALS ARE ALSO GROWN HERE.
FARMER IAN DALTON SAYS
THAT GLOBAL WARMING
IS ALREADY
HAVING AN EFFECT.
DURING THE 2007, 2008 YEARS
AND THE HARVEST OF 2007,
WE'VE SEEN
HUGE VOLATILITY.
SO, YOU KNOW, PRICES OF WHEAT
DOUBLING AND THEN HALVING
IN LESS THAN 12 MONTHS IS AN
EXTRAORDINARILY DIFFICULT
POSITION FOR FARMERS TO
MANAGE THEIR BUSINESSES.
>>IAN HAS SEEN THE PRICES HE
HAS PAID FOR A TON OF WHEAT
SWING FROM $140 UP TO $300
AND THEN BACK DOWN AGAIN
TO $140 IN THE
LAST TWO YEARS.
ONE OF THE ISSUES THAT FARMERS
HAVE GOT TO FACE IS VOLATILITY.
AND WHAT IT DOES TO ME
IS MAKE IT VERY DIFFICULT
TO DECIDE WHAT
TO GROW NEXT YEAR.
AND THAT WILL
AFFECT THE YIELD.
>>MANY BELIEVE THAT THE
VOLATILITY IN THE GRAIN MARKETS
IS THE RESULT, AT LEAST IN
PART, OF CLIMATE CHANGE.
WHETHER YOU CALL IT GLOBAL
WARMING OR GLOBAL CHANGE,
IT'S CERTAINLY HAVING
WHAT I THINK IS HAVING
A SIGNIFICANT EFFECT IN
TERMS OF THIS VOLATILITY.
WE'VE BEEN GROWING APPLES ON
THE FARM FOR THE BEST PART OF
70 YEARS AND WE ARE SEEING
THIS TREND TO EARLIER SPRINGS.
WHAT WE'VE HAD IS A VERY WET
AND COLD WINTER AFTER A RUN OF
VERY MILD WINTERS, AND IT'S THIS
CHANGEABILITY, THIS VOLATILITY.
YOU KNOW, WE SEEM TO SET
ANOTHER METEOROLOGICAL
RECORD EVERY OTHER
MONTH THESE DAYS
AND I THINK THAT IS ALL
PART OF GLOBAL WARMING.
THERE IS ONLY ONE PLANET,
THERE IS ONLY A LIMITED
AMOUNT OF THE
RESOURCES WE USE.
WE WILL HAVE TO REDUCE
OUR OWN CONSUMPTION.
IF WE KEEP GROWING AS WE ARE,
WE'LL NEED TWO OR THREE PLANETS
NEVER MIND ONE.
>>SO EVEN IN MORE TEMPERATE
PARTS OF THE WORLD,
CLIMATE CHANGE IS SET
TO MAKE AGRICULTURE
EVEN LESS PREDICTABLE FOR
FARMERS AND FOR CONSUMERS.
FOR SHOPPERS, WHEREVER
THEIR FOOD HAS BEEN GROWN
THERE WILL BE LESS
CERTAINTY ABOUT
THE AVAILABILITY OF FOOD,
ITS QUALITY, AND ITS PRICE.
SOME OF THE WORLD'S KEY
NATURAL RESOURCES NEEDED
FOR FOOD PRODUCTION
MAY ALSO BE UNDER THREAT.
ONE LARGELY UNSEEN,
UNNOTICED, BUT CRUCIALLY
IMPORTANT COMMODITY
ESSENTIAL FOR TODAY'S
INDUSTRIALIZED, INTENSIVE
FORM OF AGRICULTURE IS OIL.
OIL IS NEEDED FOR THE
TRACTORS AND THE TRANSPORT
USED IN AGRICULTURE.
AND OF COURSE AS
FUEL FOR COOKING.
AND WHAT ABOUT THE
FERTILIZERS AND THE PESTICIDES?
OIL AGAIN.
AND THEN THERE'S
STORAGE, PROCESSING
AND OFTEN OIL-BASED
PACKAGING AS WELL.
IT CAN TAKE UP TO
70 MILLILITERS OF OIL
TO PRODUCE A 100
GRAM PORK CHOP...
IT'S NEARLY DOUBLE THAT FOR
A 100 GRAM PACK OF CHEESE...
A TOMATO GROWN IN
A GREENHOUSE CAN USE
MORE THAN A THIRD
OF A LITER OF OIL.
BUT THE PREDICTIONS ARE
THAT THE OIL WHICH HAS
ENABLED OUR INCREASINGLY
INTENSIVE AND MECHANIZED
MODERN FARMING TECHNIQUES
WILL NOT LAST FOREVER.
AND WE'VE ALREADY
HAD WARNINGS
IN THE SHAPE OF
INCREASING OIL PRICES.
OIL HIT A RECORD
$147 PER BARREL IN 2008.
IT HELPED TO PUSH FOOD
INFLATION UP TO DOUBLE FIGURES.
SOME FEAR THAT OIL PRICES
COULD REACH $200 PER BARREL
IN THE YEARS AHEAD.
SO WHAT EFFECT COULD A
DRASTIC DROP-OFF IN OIL SUPPLY
HAVE ON FOOD
PRODUCTION?
ONE COUNTRY THAT MAY HAVE THE
ANSWER HAS ALREADY EXPERIENCED
THE KIND OF OIL SHOCK PREDICTED
FOR THE REST OF THE WORLD: CUBA.
UNTIL 1989, CUBA EXCHANGED ITS
ABUNDANT SUGAR PRODUCTION
FOR CHEAP IMPORTED SUBSIDIZED
OIL FROM THE EASTERN BLOC.
IN FACT IT WAS SO CHEAP
THAT CUBA PURSUED A HIGHLY
INDUSTRIALIZED FUEL-THIRSTY
FORM OF AGRICULTURE.
AFTER THE COLLAPSE
OF THE SOVIET UNION
THE SUPPLY OF CRUDE OIL
WENT DOWN BY ABOUT 50%
WITH DRAMATIC IMPLICATIONS
FOR FOOD PRODUCTION.
IT WAS AS IF THE OIL TAP
WAS SUDDENLY TURNED OFF.
ALL THOSE SUBSIDIES WE
RECEIVED FROM ABROAD,
AND ESPECIALLY
OIL, WAS REDUCED
AND THE ECONOMY
BASICALLY COLLAPSED.
WE HAD TO GROW
FOOD WITH LESS OIL
AND THE FARMING SYSTEMS
WERE ADAPTED TO THAT.
WE HAD TO CHANGE FROM VERY
CONVENTIONAL AGRICULTURE
TO A MORE SELF-SUFFICIENT
AND LOCALLY BASED AGRICULTURE
AND COUNTING ON THE RESOURCES
THAT WE HAD AT THAT MOMENT.
>>FERNANDO FUNES IS
WORKING ON A NEW LOW-OIL,
HIGH-YIELD
APPROACH TO FARMING
THAT MAY HAVE LESSONS
FOR US ALL IN THE FUTURE.
IT CERTAINLY LOOKS VERY
DIFFERENT TO THE VAST
SINGLE-CROP FIELDS YOU SEE IN
OTHER PARTS OF THE WORLD.
HERE THERE ARE ROWS OF SEVERAL
PLANTS GROWING SIDE BY SIDE.
ANIMALS CAN BE
REARED ON FARM WASTE
AND THEY ARE ALSO
USED TO WORK THE LAND.
IT'S LIKE AGRICULTURAL
MIX 'N MATCH.
EVERY BIT OF LAND IS USED,
MAXIMIZING PRODUCTION.
THIS KIND OF FARMING THAT
COMBINES MANY DIFFERENT CROPS
AND LIVESTOCK AND SO ON IS SET
UP TO CAPTURE ENERGY FROM SUN
AND TO MAKE BETTER USE
OF WATER AND NUTRIENTS.
IN THE CONVENTIONAL WAY OF
FARMING, ABOUT FIVE CALORIES
ARE NECESSARY TO PRODUCE ONE
CALORIE IN TERMS OF PRODUCE.
IN THIS KIND OF FARMING,
BIODIVERSITY MAKES POSSIBLE
TO PRODUCE ABOUT FIVE
PER ONE CALORIE INPUT.
>>USING FERNANDO'S
CALCULATIONS,
THAT WOULD MAKE
THIS KIND OF LOW-OIL,
POLY-CROPPING
APPROACH TO AGRICULTURE
25 TIMES MORE EFFICIENT THAN
INDUSTRIALIZED MODERN FARMING.
YOU DON'T USE
FUEL-THIRSTY TRACTORS.
ACTUALLY YOU COULDN'T FIT THEM
IN BETWEEN THE ROWS OF PLANTS.
AND YOU CAN PRODUCE A
LOT OF FOOD IN A SMALL AREA.
BUT THIS KIND OF FARMING
IS NOT A MIRACLE SOLUTION
TO A FUEL SHORTAGE.
A RETURN TO WHAT MANY WOULD SEE
AS A PRE-INDUSTRIALIZED FORM OF
AGRICULTURE WORLDWIDE WOULD
REQUIRE MILLIONS MORE PEOPLE TO
WORK THE LAND AND A DRAMATIC
RISE IN THE PRICE OF FOOD.
CUBA DIDN'T HAVE ANY CHOICE BUT
TO ADAPT ITS FARMING TECHNIQUES
IN THIS WAY, AND THE LOSS OF OIL
TO THE AGRICULTURAL SECTOR
HASN'T BEEN
WITHOUT CONSEQUENCE.
ONE OF THE FIRST CASUALTIES
WAS THE RANGE OF FOOD
THAT HAD BEEN AVAILABLE
FOR PEOPLE TO EAT.
WHILST CUBANS HAVE AN INTAKE
OF CALORIES NOT MUCH BELOW
THE UNITED STATES,
MUCH OF THE CUBAN DIET
IS MADE UP OF
VEGETABLES AND PULSES.
CUBANS GET ABOUT THREE TIMES
LESS OF THEIR FOOD ENERGY
FROM ANIMAL PRODUCTS
LIKE MEAT AND DAIRY
THAN THE AVERAGE
WESTERN COUNTRY.
TWENTY YEARS AFTER THE
OIL CRISIS, AND DESPITE THE
CHANGING DIET AND ADAPTED
AGRICULTURAL PROCESSES,
CUBA STILL IMPORTS
ABOUT HALF OF ITS FOOD.
A FUEL SHOCK CAN QUITE
QUICKLY BECOME A FOOD SHOCK.
SO IF, AS SOME BELIEVE,
GLOBAL OIL RESERVES ARE NOW
UNDER THREAT, WE MAY
HAVE TO COMPLETELY RETHINK
OUR HEAVILY MECHANIZED
FORM OF AGRICULTURE.
OIL NOT ONLY PROVIDES FUEL
FOR AGRICULTURAL VEHICLES,
IT FUELS OVER 600 MILLION
AUTOMOBILES WORLDWIDE.
ONE ALTERNATIVE
TO OIL-BASED FUEL
IS FUEL MADE WITH
PLANTS AND GRAIN.
ENTHUSIASM FOR THESE
SO-CALLED "BIOFUELS"
HAS GROWN AS OIL
PRICES HAVE RISEN
AND CLIMATE CHANGE
FEARS ESCALATED.
BUT SOME BELIEVE
THAT THIS IS ANOTHER
AND VERY SERIOUS
THREAT TO FOOD SECURITY.
INDIA HAS EMBRACED THE IDEA
OF BIOFUELS IN RECENT YEARS.
BUT IN A COUNTRY WHERE JUST
A 10% RISE IN THE COST OF FOOD
MEANS ANOTHER 40 MILLION
PEOPLE ARE PUSHED INTO POVERTY,
IT'S A
CONTROVERSIAL POLICY.
THIS FIELD IS PLANTED
WITH JATROPHA.
THERE'S QUITE A BUZZ ABOUT
IT IN ENVIRONMENTAL CIRCLES.
IT'S SEEN AS THE LATEST
RENEWABLE ALTERNATIVE
TO FOSSIL FUEL.
IT'S BEING GROWN IN
CHATTISGARH IN CENTRAL INDIA
AN AREA NOW DUBBED
"INDIA'S BIOFUEL STATE".
BEFORE JATROPHA WAS PLANTED,
18 FAMILIES USED TO GET FOOD
FROM THIS FIELD WHICH WAS
REGARDED AS COMMON LAND.
THE LOCAL FARMERS HAD
THEIR CROPS UPROOTED
BY THE AUTHORITIES.
THEY ARE NOW RELYING
ON FOOD HANDOUTS.
THE VILLAGERS HAVE
BEEN JOINING FORCES
TO RESIST THE
PLANTING OF JATROPHA.
THE VILLAGERS HAVE RIPPED
UP SOME OF THE JATROPHA
BUT IT'S BEEN
REPLANTED.
AJI DAKKA HAS BEEN JAILED
FOR HER RESISTANCE.
SHE AND OTHER VILLAGERS
VOW TO FIGHT ON.
INDIA WANTS 20% OF
THE NATION'S DIESEL FUEL
TO COME FROM CROPS IN
JUST EIGHT YEARS' TIME.
THIS WOULD
REQUIRE AN ADDITIONAL
14 MILLION
HECTARES OF LAND.
THE INDIAN GOVERNMENT SAYS
THAT LAND USED TO FEED THE
POPULATION SHOULD NOT BE
USED TO GROW CROPS FOR FUEL.
BUT THERE HAVE BEEN MANY
REPORTED CASES OF FARMERS
AROUND THE DEVELOPING WORLD
BEING THROWN OFF THEIR LAND.
WHAT WE HAVE IN THE WORLD TODAY
IS AN EMERGING COMPETITION
BETWEEN CARS AND PEOPLE
FOR THE WORLD'S GRAIN SUPPLY.
AND IF GOVERNMENTS
DO NOT INTERVENE,
IF WE JUST LET THE MARKET
GO WITH THIS AND KEEP
SUBSIDIZING THE CONVERSION
OF GRAIN INTO FUEL,
THE WORLD'S GOING
TO BE IN TROUBLE.
THE ECONOMIC INSTABILITY
LEADING TO POLITICAL
INSTABILITY AND IT BECOMES
A THREAT TO SECURITY.
AND I DON'T THINK WE'VE
QUITE REALIZED THAT YET.
I MEAN, THE IRONY IS THAT THE
U.S., IN AN EFFORT TO REDUCE
ITS OIL INSECURITY, HAS CREATED
GLOBAL FOOD INSECURITY
ON A SCALE THAT
WE'VE NOT SEEN BEFORE.
>>THE TREND TOWARDS USING
AGRICULTURAL LAND FOR FUEL
RATHER THAN FOOD
IS WORLDWIDE.
IN THE U.S., AN ESTIMATED
ONE-THIRD OF THE COUNTRY'S
MAIZE CROP COULD GO
TO PRODUCE FUEL BY 2010.
IN BRITAIN, SUGAR AND OILSEED
RAPE ARE THE COUNTRY'S
LARGEST BIOFUEL CROPS,
AND TOGETHER LAST YEAR
THEY PROVIDED 60
MILLION LITERS OF FUEL.
THIS IS BRITISH SUGAR'S
WISSINGTON PLANT -
THE LARGEST SUGAR
REFINERY IN EUROPE.
BUT SUGARBEET HERE DOESN'T
ONLY GO TO MAKE SUGAR,
IT ALSO MAKES BIOFUEL.
IN LINE WITH EUROPEAN
UNION POLICY,
THE PROPORTION OF BIOFUELS
BURNED IN VEHICLES IN THE UK
MUST REACH ALMOST
6% DURING 2010.
ACROSS THE WORLD THE RISE OF
BIOFUEL PRODUCTION HAS BEEN
LINKED TO THE FOOD PRICE
RISES SEEN IN RECENT YEARS.
DR. JEREMY WOODS
IS ONE OF BRITAIN'S
TOP EXPERTS
ON BIOFUELS.
IN PART IT'S LIKELY THAT
BIOFUELS WERE RESPONSIBLE
FOR PART OF THE INCREASE IN
THE FOOD PRICES, BUT IN FACT
THAT'S BEEN REALLY QUITE
SUBSTANTIALLY EXAGGERATED.
AND THAT ARGUMENT I THINK HAS
CLOUDED OUT THE POTENTIAL
BENEFITS THAT BIOFUELS AND
BIOENERGY COULD BRING TO A
FUTURE WORLD WHERE OIL AND
GAS ARE BECOMING CONSTRAINED.
IN THE FUTURE, THOUGH, IF
BIOFUELS ARE REGARDED AS THE
WHOLE SOLUTION TO THE PROBLEM,
IT'S LIKELY THAT THEY WOULD
CAUSE REAL PROBLEMS IN TERMS
OF COMPETITION FOR FOOD.
WE'VE GOT SOME FUNDAMENTAL
THINKING TO DO ABOUT THE WAY
FOOD IS PRODUCED AND USED
GLOBALLY, AND THAT SHOULD BE
DONE IN A WAY THAT ALLOWS US TO
MANAGE THIS BALANCE OF SUPPLY
AND DEMAND SO WE GET BACK
TO A SITUATION WHERE WE HAVE
SURPLUS FOOD BUT THAT
SURPLUS FOOD IS BEING USED
PRODUCTIVELY - I.E., FOR
BIOENERGY, FOR BIOFUELS.
>>IF THE EXPERIENCE OF THE LAST
FEW YEARS IS ANYTHING TO GO BY,
FINDING THAT BALANCE
WILL BE DIFFICULT.
THERE WOULD HAVE TO BE SOME
WAY TO ENSURE THAT BIOFUELS
FOR THE RICH DOESN'T COME AT THE
EXPENSE OF FOOD FOR THE POOR.
IT'S AS MUCH A POLITICAL
PROBLEM AS A PRACTICAL ONE.
ANOTHER OF THE WORLD'S KEY
RESOURCES IS SUFFERING
FROM OVER EXPLOITATION,
AND AGAIN IT IS VITAL
TO KEEP THE GLOBAL
POPULATION FROM HUNGER.
MORE THAN ONE BILLION
PEOPLE WORLDWIDE
DO NOT HAVE
ACCESS TO SAFE WATER.
GLOBAL WATER CONSUMPTION
IS PREDICTED TO DOUBLE
EVERY 20 YEARS, AND
WATER IS KEY TO TODAY'S
INTENSIVE MECHANIZED
FORM OF AGRICULTURE.
IN FACT, MOST OF WHAT WE
EAT DRAWS DOWN HEAVILY
ON GLOBAL
WATER RESOURCES.
IT CAN TAKE UP TO 130
MILLILITERS OF WATER
TO GROW A GRAM
OF LETTUCE...
3.4 LITERS TO PRODUCE
ONE GRAM OF RICE...
AND ONE GRAM OF LAMB CAN USE
NEARLY 15 LITERS OF WATER.
IN THE DEVELOPED WORLD,
THE AVERAGE CONSUMER
CAN USE UP TO 3,000 LITERS
OF FOREIGN WATER A DAY...
AND MOST OF IT IN
THE FORM OF FOOD.
PUNJAB, KNOWN AS
INDIA'S BREADBASKET.
THIS SMALL STATE ABOUT 200
MILES NORTHWEST OF DELHI
PRODUCES ONE-FIFTH OF
ALL THE COUNTRY'S WHEAT.
AS FAR AS THE EYE CAN SEE
ARE GOLDEN FIELDS OF WHEAT
READY TO BE
HARVESTED.
BUT LOOKS CAN
BE DECEIVING.
FOOD PRODUCTION IN THIS
REGION IS NOW UNDER THREAT.
"PUNJAB" MEANS "THE LAND OF THE
FIVE RIVERS", BUT MANY DECADES
OF INTENSIVE AGRICULTURE HAVE
STARTED TO DRAIN THE STATE DRY.
SUKHDEV SINGH IS A PUNJABI
FARMER WHO HAS BEEN
WORKING THIS LAND
SINCE THE 1970'S.
SUKHDEV HAS BEEN FORCED
TO DRILL DEEPER AND DEEPER
DOWN FOR WATER TO IRRIGATE
HIS FIVE ACRES OF LAND,
DRILLING TEN
WELLS IN TOTAL.
BUT THE DEEPER THEY GO, THE
POORER THE QUALITY OF WATER.
IT'S MORE SALTY AND MUCH LESS
EFFECTIVE FOR IRRIGATION.
THOUSANDS OF FARMERS IN PUNJAB
ARE BEING FORCED TO BORROW
BEYOND THEIR MEANS TO PAY
FOR THE SPECIALIZED EQUIPMENT
NEEDED TO DIG THE NEW DEEP
WELLS AND IRRIGATE THEIR CROPS.
SUKHDEV SINGH TOO HAS HAD
TO BORROW TO DIG HIS WELLS.
IN SUKHDEV'S OWN VILLAGE THERE
HAVE BEEN SEVERAL SUICIDES
IN RECENT YEARS.
IT'S SIMILAR
ACROSS PUNJAB.
AND MANY FARM WORKERS ARE
NOW MOVING OUT OF AGRICULTURE
ALTOGETHER, BELIEVING THAT
THE SITUATION IS IRREVERSIBLE.
PUNJAB'S WATER TABLE IS DROPPING
BY AS MUCH AS A METER A YEAR.
WHEAT PRODUCTION ACROSS
THE STATE HAS BEEN IN DECLINE
FOR A DECADE.
INDIAN AUTHOR, VANDANA SHIVA,
HAS INVESTIGATED WHAT WATER
SCARCITY MEANS FOR THE GLOBAL
FOOD SUPPLY WE ALL DEPEND ON.
I THINK WATER SCARCITY IS
NOT A PROBLEM OF THE FUTURE;
IT'S HAPPENING. I
WITNESS IT ALL THE TIME.
IT'S NOT ABOUT FUTURE WORLD
WARS OVER WATER, IT'S ABOUT
TODAY'S WARS OVER A
CONSTANTLY SHRINKING RESOURCE
IN A PERIOD OF AN INCREASING
APPETITE FOR WATER
IN A GLOBALIZED ECONOMY THAT
NO MORE SEES ITS OWN FOOTPRINT
IN TERMS OF HOW MUCH
WATER THEY'VE USED.
>>AND DEVELOPED COUNTRIES
WITH THEIR INSATIABLE APPETITE
FOR A WIDE ARRAY OF FOODS
FROM ACROSS THE GLOBE
SHARE A LARGE
PART OF THE BLAME.
IF A FARMER GROWS
LETTUCE IN PUNJAB,
HE IS USING GROUNDWATER
TO MAKE THAT LETTUCE GROW.
WHEN THAT LETTUCE
IS EXPORTED,
IT CARRIES WITH
IT VIRTUAL WATER.
IT CARRIES A VERY
HEAVY WATER FOOTPRINT.
IN EFFECT THE RICH
COUNTRIES, THEY HAVE
IMPORTED VIRTUAL WATER,
WHICH THEY'RE NOT SEEING,
BUT THEY HAVE SIMULTANEOUSLY
EXPORTED DROUGHT.
>>THERE IS LITTLE DOUBT THAT
THE PROBLEM OF WORLDWIDE
WATER SCARCITY
CAN BE IGNORED.
WITHIN 15 YEARS EXPERTS
PREDICT THAT WORLD
WATER SHORTAGES COULD
REDUCE FOOD PRODUCTION
BY MORE THAN THE ENTIRE
CURRENT U.S. GRAIN CROP.
WHILST DEVELOPED COUNTRIES
HAVE BEEN IMPORTING FOOD
FROM ACROSS THE GLOBE TO
SATISFY DOMESTIC DEMAND,
THEIR OWN FOOD PRODUCTION
HAS ALSO BEEN SUFFERING.
WORLDWIDE, WE EACH EAT ON
AVERAGE 20 KILOGRAMS OF FISH
EVERY YEAR.
BUT SOME EXPERTS BELIEVE THAT
THE WORLD'S STOCKS OF SEAFOOD
COULD COLLAPSE BY 2048.
GRIMSBY, ONE OF BRITAIN'S
BEST KNOWN FISHING HARBORS.
THIRTY YEARS AGO THERE WERE
AROUND 6,000 FISHERMEN WORKING
THE SEAS AROUND THIS AREA AND
ABOUT 40,000 JOBS BACK ON LAND.
IT'S VERY
DIFFERENT TODAY.
THIS IS A RARE EVENT IN
GRIMSBY NOW: A UK TRAWLER
UNLOADING ITS OWN CATCH
HERE ON THE DOCKSIDE.
THE UK IS INCREASINGLY
RELIANT ON FISH IMPORTS.
GRIMSBY, ONCE THE PRIDE
OF BRITISH FISHING,
IS NOW MAINLY A DISTRIBUTION
AND PROCESSING CENTER
FOR OTHER
COUNTRIES' FISH.
EACH WEEKDAY MORNING
THERE'S A FISH MARKET.
25,000 TONS OF FISH IS
SOLD HERE EACH YEAR.
BUT THAT'S NOTHING COMPARED
TO SOME 60 YEARS AGO
WHEN THE GRIMSBY
FISHING FLEET ALONE
LANDED 200,000 TONS
OF FISH OVER 12 MONTHS.
CALLUM ROBERTS
IS ONE OF THE UK'S
LEADING MARINE
CONSERVATIONISTS.
COLLECTIVELY THE
AMOUNT OF BOTTOM FISH,
THOSE THAT ARE CAUGHT
USING BOTTOM TRAWLS,
HAS DECLINED BY OVER 90% SINCE
THE END OF THE 19TH CENTURY.
SO THERE'S LESS
THAN ONE FISH AROUND
FOR EVERY TEN THAT
THERE WERE THEN.
>>CALLUM HAS BEEN MONITORING
THE FISH STOCKS' FALL.
IN THE 19TH CENTURY SHOALS
OF HADDOCK WERE REPORTED
THAT WOULD STRETCH
FOR 150 MILES
ALONG THE
YORKSHIRE COAST;
THEY'D BE THREE
OR FOUR MILES WIDE
AND REALLY YOU DIDN'T NEED
TO GO VERY FAR FROM PORT
TO GET AN EXCELLENT
DAY'S CATCH.
THAT ABUNDANCE REALLY
CONTINUED THROUGH THE 1950'S
AND INTO THE 1960'S.
WE WERE STILL CATCHING A GREAT
DEAL OF COD AND HADDOCK THEN,
BUT IT'S BEEN IN
DECLINE EVER SINCE THEN
UNTIL THE POINT TODAY WHERE
THERE'S HARDLY ANY LEFT.
>>OVERFISHING HAS BEEN
BLAMED FOR THE DRAMATIC
DROP IN FISH STOCKS...
AND THE SIZE OF
THE FISH CAUGHT.
A LOT OF THE FISH THAT YOU
SEE IN A MARKET LIKE THIS
HAVE NOT EVEN REACHED
SEXUAL MATURITY,
SO THEY HAVEN'T HAD A
CHANCE TO REPRODUCE YET.
AND AS FISHING PRESSURE HAS
RISEN, THE AMOUNT OF FISH IN
THE SEA HAS DWINDLED AND THEIR
SIZES HAVE GOT MUCH SMALLER.
>>MORE THAN 80% OF UK FISH
SPECIES ARE UNDER THREAT.
THE COUNTRY NOW LANDS 15
TIMES LESS FISH THAN IN 1920.
SOME EXPERTS CLAIM THAT THE
DOMESTIC FISHING INDUSTRY
COULD DIE OUT UNLESS
THE UK CATCH IS CUT BY HALF
AND FISHING BANNED
IN A THIRD OF ITS SEAS.
MEANWHILE THE COUNTRY IS EATING
MORE FISH THAN EVER BEFORE.
AND THE FISH TO SUPPLY THIS
$9 BILLION A YEAR MARKET
NEEDS TO COME
FROM SOMEWHERE.
AND THEY COULD COME FROM OFF
THE COAST OF POORER COUNTRIES
WHO HAVE BEEN PAID TO
ALLOW FISHING IN THEIR SEAS
EVEN IF THEY HAVE THEIR
OWN FOOD SHORTAGES.
ONE OF THOSE
COUNTRIES IS SENEGAL,
ONE OF THE POOREST
COUNTRIES IN THE WORLD.
IT'S EARLY MORNING AT THE
BEACH IN DAKAR, AND PAPANDOY
AND HIS CREW ARE HEADING
OUT FOR THEIR DAY'S FISHING.
LOCALS HAVE BEEN FISHING
IN PIROGUES FOR CENTURIES.
THE ONLY REAL CHANGE IS
THE MOTOR AT THE BACK.
>>ABOUT 200,000 PEOPLE WORK IN
THE FISHING INDUSTRY IN SENEGAL.
IT'S THEIR LIVELIHOOD. BUT
THESE DAYS THE LOCAL FISHERMEN
HAVEN'T GOT THESE WATERS
ENTIRELY TO THEMSELVES.
FOR YEARS NOW, TRAWLERS
FROM AROUND THE WORLD
HAVE FISHED THESE WATERS
- SOME ILLEGALLY,
SOME WITH THE AGREEMENT OF
THE SENEGALESE GOVERNMENT.
ABOUT 25,000 TONS OF
FISH IS EXPORTED TO THE
EUROPEAN UNION
FROM HERE EACH YEAR.
AND LOCAL FISHERMEN HAVE
NOTICED THE DIFFERENCE.
>>LAST YEAR THE EUROPEAN UNION
PAID DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
OVER 200 MILLION DOLLARS TO
ALLOW MODERN EUROPEAN FLEETS
TO FISH THEIR WATERS.
THE EU USED TO HAVE AN
ARRANGEMENT LIKE THIS
WITH SENEGAL, BUT IT
ENDED OVER COMPLAINTS
THAT TOO MANY FISH
WERE BEING TAKEN.
DOWN AT DAKAR HARBOR THE
QUAYSIDES ARE JAM PACKED
WITH MODERN
INDUSTRIAL TRAWLERS.
SOME SAY IT'S OPEN
SEASON OFF SENEGAL'S COAST.
THAT'S HARDLY
SURPRISING.
THERE'S BIG
MONEY AT STAKE.
THE GLOBAL FISHING
INDUSTRY IS SAID TO BE
WORTH MORE THAN
$160 BILLION A YEAR.
MOUSSA FAYE FROM
THE CHARITY ACTIONAID
CAMPAIGNS AGAINST
OVERFISHING
AND ARGUES THAT
EUROPEAN TRAWLERS
ARE STILL FINDING WAYS TO
FISH OFF SENEGAL'S COAST.
SO HERE WE HAVE A LOT OF FISHING
BOATS FROM SOUTHERN EUROPE,
SPAIN, PORTUGAL,
OR FRANCE, ET CETERA.
EUROPEAN ENTERPRISES WHO COME
FOR OUR RESOURCES AND WHO
EXPORT THE FISH AND REPATRIATE
ALSO THE PROFIT THEY MAKE
AT THE EXPENSE OF MILLIONS
OF SENEGALESE PEOPLE.
THERE IS NO SERIOUS
LIMITATION ALSO
FOR THE NUMBER OF
TRAWLERS AUTHORIZED TO FISH.
I THINK THAT THIS FISH
RESOURCE SHOULD SERVE
THE SENEGALESE PEOPLE,
SERVE THE POOR PEOPLE HERE,
SHOULD BE A SOURCE OF
LIVELIHOOD FOR THESE PEOPLE.
>>EACH YEAR MORE AND
MORE SENEGALESE FISHERMEN
WALK AWAY
FROM THE SEA,
TURNING THEIR BACK ON
CENTURIES OF TRADITION.
THE SENEGALESE DIET
IS BEING CHANGED TOO.
FISH HAS TRADITIONALLY
BEEN THE CHEAPEST FORM
OF ANIMAL PROTEIN
HERE, MAKING UP THE
LARGE MAJORITY OF
PROTEIN IN THE LOCAL DIET
AS IT DOES FOR A BILLION
PEOPLE ON THE PLANET TODAY.
THREE QUARTERS OF GLOBAL
FISH STOCKS ARE NOW FULLY
OR OVER EXPLOITED.
IF WE CARRY ON AS WE
ARE, ALL GLOBAL FISHERIES
COULD COLLAPSE BY THE
MIDDLE OF THE CENTURY,
MAKING FISH AN EXPENSIVE
DELICACY FOR THE RICH
AND RESULTING IN HUNGER FOR
MILLIONS OF THE WORLD'S POOR.
IT'S NOT JUST FISH
SUFFERING FROM
AN IMBALANCE BETWEEN
DEMAND AND SUPPLY.
INCREASED CONSUMPTION OF
MEAT AND DAIRY PRODUCTS
ACROSS THE GLOBE IS
SET TO BE A MAJOR FACTOR
IN WORLDWIDE FOOD
SHORTAGES IN YEARS TO COME.
THERE ARE ALMOST 1.5
BILLION COWS WORLDWIDE
AND MORE THAN ONE IN TEN OF
THEM ARE IN ONE COUNTRY: INDIA.
WHILE MEAT CONSUMPTION IS ONLY
INCREASING SLOWLY IN INDIA,
PEOPLE HERE HAVE BECOME
HUGE CONSUMERS OF MILK,
MAKING THE COUNTRY
THE WORLD'S LARGEST
DAIRY PRODUCER.
DR. IAIN WRIGHT, A
SCOTSMAN BASED IN INDIA,
HAS BEEN FOLLOWING THIS
DRAMATIC TRANSFORMATION.
IN THE LAST 30 OR 40 YEARS
OR SO THE MILK CONSUMPTION
IN INDIA HAS GONE UP
BY ALMOST SIX-FOLD.
THAT'S BEEN DRIVEN BY BOTH
THE INCREASE IN POPULATION,
BUT ALSO BY AN INCREASE IN
MILK CONSUMPTION PER HEAD.
MILK CONSUMPTION PER
PERSON HAS DOUBLED IN INDIA
IN THE LAST 40
YEARS OR SO.
>>WHAT IS TRUE FOR MILK
IN INDIA IS TRANSLATED TO
MEAT CONSUMPTION ACROSS
THE DEVELOPING WORLD.
IN INDIA WE SEE INCREASES IN
THE NUMBER OF LARGE SCALE
POULTRY UNITS.
IT'S HAPPENING IN CHINA
WITH AN INCREASE IN
PORK CONSUMPTION AND
PRODUCTION IN TERMS OF UNITS,
INCREASE IN POULTRY
CONSUMPTION
- BOTH MEAT AND
EGGS IN CHINA.
LIKE MOST DEVELOPING
COUNTRIES, AS INCOMES RISE
PEOPLE GET SLIGHTLY RICHER
AND MORE DISPOSABLE INCOME,
THEN THEY START CONSUMING
MORE ANIMAL PRODUCTS.
>>GLOBAL MEAT AND MILK
PRODUCTION IS EXPECTED
TO DOUBLE BY 2050.
THE EXPLOSION
OF WEALTH IN CHINA
HAS MEANT THAT IN THE
LAST DECADE ALONE,
MEAT CONSUMPTION PER
PERSON HAS DOUBLED.
AND THAT TREND IS
LIKELY TO CONTINUE
AS THE MIDDLE CLASSES IN
CHINA AND INDIA KEEP EXPANDING
AND THE WORLD'S POOREST
BECOME MORE PROSPEROUS.
WE OFTEN THINK THAT THE BIG
INCREASE IN CONSUMPTION IS
COMING FROM THE EMERGING MIDDLE
CLASSES IN THE DEVELOPING WORLD,
BUT IN FACT IF YOU LOOK AT THE
STATISTICS YOU FIND THAT THE
PEOPLE WHO ARE MOVING FROM
UNDER $2 A DAY TO BETWEEN
$2 AND $5 A DAY INCOME
ARE ALSO INCREASING
THEIR CONSUMPTION
OF ANIMAL PRODUCTS.
AND BECAUSE THEY REPRESENT
SUCH A LARGE PROPORTION
OF THE TOTAL POPULATION,
THAT REPRESENTS A HUGE
INCREASE IN THE MARKET
FOR MEAT AND MILK.
>>ALL OF THIS MEANS
AN INCREASING DEMAND
ON THE WORLD'S
MEAT SUPPLIES.
ADD THAT TO WESTERN
COUNTRIES' MEAT CONSUMPTION
- OVER 80 KILOGRAMS FOR
EVERY PERSON EVERY YEAR -
AND IT'S NO WONDER THAT
THE UNITED NATIONS SAYS THAT
THE WORLD JUST CAN'T COPE WITH
THIS LEVEL OF MEAT CONSUMPTION.
AND NOBEL PRIZE WINNER
RAJENDRA PACHAURI AGREES.
I BELIEVE ONE AREA WHERE
WE NEED URGENT CHANGE IS
ESSENTIALLY IN REDUCING OUR
CONSUMPTION OF ANIMAL PROTEINS.
IN OTHER WORDS,
EATING LESS MEAT.
EURO CATTLE THESE DAYS ARE
FED ALL KINDS OF INPUTS FOR
THEIR GROWTH AND A LARGE PART
OF IT IS ESSENTIALLY GRAINS.
SO YOU'RE DIVERTING A LARGE
QUANTITY OF FOOD PRODUCTION
THAT PERHAPS COULD BE USED
DIRECTLY FOR HUMAN CONSUMPTION
AND NOW IS BEING PROVIDED FOR
CONVERSION TO ANIMAL PROTEIN.
>>PRODUCING MORE MEAT
IS NOT JUST ABOUT HAVING
MORE SHEEP, COWS,
AND CHICKENS.
THEY ALL HAVE TO BE FED,
AND THE CEREAL USED
TO GET THE MEAT ONTO
OUR PLATES IS STAGGERING.
IT TAKES 2.3 KILOGRAMS OF GRAIN
TO PRODUCE ONE KILO OF CHICKEN,
AROUND SIX KILOGRAMS OF
GRAIN MAKES A KILO OF PORK...
AND IT TAKES 15
KILOGRAMS OF GRAIN
TO PRODUCE JUST
ONE KILO OF BEEF.
WE REALLY NEED SOME MAJOR
CHANGES IN OUR DIETARY HABITS
AND YOU LOOK AT THE
CASE OF NORTH AMERICA
WHERE YOU GO TO A
RESTAURANT AND ORDER A STEAK
- AS INDEED I USED TO DO BEFORE
I BECAME A VEGETARIAN -
THEY GIVE YOU A
BIG HUGE HELPING.
THIS HUGE STEAK THAT
YOU'RE EATING CAN FEED
ABOUT 40 PEOPLE IF YOU
WERE NOT CONSUMING THIS
- AND I'M NOT SAYING THAT
THIS TRANSLATES IMMEDIATELY
INTO SATISFYING THE
HUNGER OF 40 PEOPLE -
BUT THE EQUIVALENT OF A STEAK
WOULD BE SOMEWHERE CLOSE
TO THAT NUMBER OF PEOPLE
BEING DEPRIVED OF FOOD.
>>RAJENDRA PACHAURI'S
WARNINGS ABOUT MEAT
MAY BE TRUE
FOR ALL FOOD.
CURRENT LEVELS OF CONSUMPTION
IN RICH PARTS OF THE WORLD
ARE NOT SUSTAINABLE.
THE INEVITABLE INCREASE
IN CONSUMPTION
IN THE DEVELOPING
WORLD IS UNSTOPPABLE.
A COLLISION COURSE WITH A
FOOD CRISIS SEEMS INEVITABLE.
OUR WORLD AND
OUR RELATIONSHIP
WITH THE FOOD WE
EAT IS CHANGING...
MAYBE BEYOND
RECOGNITION.